Black Scorpion (TV series)
Black Scorpion is an action-crime TV series that aired on the Sci-Fi Channel in 2001. It aired in Canada on Space. The series is based on two Roger Corman Showtime TV-movies: Black Scorpion (1995) and its sequel Black Scorpion II: Aftershock (1997). The show focuses on a female police officer who, by night, takes to the streets and fights crime as the superhero the Black Scorpion.
Episode 1.1, 1.3 and 1.8 were combined into a 2002 straight to video movie called Sting of the Black Scorpion.
The series was available on DVD in North America.


Lead character[edit]
Darcy Walker[edit]
The Black Scorpion's real name is Darcy Walker, played by Michelle Lintel. She lives in Angel City (a fictionalized version of Los Angeles), where she works as a police detective. Darcy's father was shot by the city's crooked district attorney. The D.A. was arrested, but the charges were suspiciously dropped. That was when Darcy decided to take to the streets as the vigilante, Black Scorpion. In the original Corman films, the role of Darcy was played by Joan Severance. In the series, she is a red-headed enforcer with a badge who enforces the law more efficiently without the badge as her crime-fighting alter-ego, Black Scorpion. She appears to be a big fan of the color black, a fact she made clear during an interview after being asked with such a trivial question which would explain the color of her costume. However, as shown in the first episode, her choice of the scorpion relates to an old fable about a scorpion trying to cross a river, which her father told her.
Black Scorpion[edit]
Apart from being an excellent hand-to-hand fighter and an expert with computers, Black Scorpion has no superpowers. She relies on various specially developed technologies, chief among them the a car called the Scorpionmobile with voice command weaponry and with a disguise capability to make it look like a regular Corvette. She also wears a ring that shoots powerful blasts of energy, and possesses a similar transformation capability to the Scorpionmobile for when Darcy needs to switch into her heroine costume in the field.
Other major characters[edit]
Major Enemies[edit]
Aerobicide
Angel of Death
Aftershock
Breathtaker
Clockwise
FireArm
Flashpoint
Gangster Prankster
Greenthumb
Hurricane
Inferno
Medusa
Mindbender
Pollutia
Professor Prophet
Slapshot
Stunner
Vox Populi
A guest appearance was made by Dave Mustaine, who portrayed the pyromaniac Torchy Thompson. During his fight scenes, sound clips of Hangar 18 were played.
Charles Fleischer makes a guest appearance in Episode 1.15 "Bad Sport" as Dr. Cairo Praktus, a mad scientist who uses his genius to create artificially enhanced super villains.
Lou Ferrigno makes a cameo appearance in Episode 1.14 "Virtual Vice".
Ben McCain appeared in 16 episodes as anchor/reporter Don MacDonald.
Episodes[edit]
References[edit]
External links[edit]
