Honolulu Hurricanes
This article is about the defunct Professional Indoor Football League team
The Honolulu Hurricanes was a Professional Indoor Football League (PIFL) team based in Honolulu, Hawaii, that competed in the 1998 season. According to the team's media guide, the ownership partners – registered as Pro Sports Limited Liability Company – were Rev. John Frederick, the team's founder and co head coach ; Sig Schuster, the CEO; Dennis Enomoto; Neil Wiedemann; Louis "Sonny" Souza, the team's on-field coach; and James K. Wong. The team office was based in Honolulu, and played their home games at the Neal S. Blaisdell Center, also in Honolulu. The team colors were red and gold. The Hurricanes were coached by the Hawaii Police Department's Louis "Sonny" Souza.
The Hurricanes played two preseason PIFL games in 1998, both victories at home:
†scheduled 1999 PIFL expansion team
All players on the Honolulu opening day roster played high school or college football in Hawaii. The list included: receivers Micah Matsuzaki and Dan Ahuna, running backs Tupu Alualu and Jerry Papalii, quarterback John Hao, offensive lineman Damon Kakalia, defensive back Niko Vitale, linebackers Manly Williams and George Noga and defensive linemen Kalei Cockett and Junior Tagoai.
The Hurricanes franchise drew about 5,500 for its first game (preseason), and 3,800 for the second, but averaged between 500 and 1,000 per game after that. Honolulu ended the 1998 PIFL season with a 6-8 record. However, the team nearly made the playoffs when commissioner Richard "Dick" Suess nearly expelled the Green Bay Bombers, Madison Mad Dogs, and Colorado Wildcats after the announcement that they were leaving to start a rival league following the season.
After the season, the Hurricanes were sold. One reason was the mounting financial burden of having to travel to the mainland for games, a problem common to nearly all Hawaii sports teams who schedule competitions on the mainland. The new owners were Straub chief executive officer Dr. Blake Waterhouse, former Hawaii Winter Baseball League owner Duane Kurisu, insurance company executive Carl Hennrich, Borthwick Group owners John and Diane Farias Jr., Borthwick general manager Scott Sells, Robertson and Co. Jewelers owner Robert Wu and Regal Travel owner Ray Miyashiro. Along with ownership change, the Hurricanes were renamed the "Hawaii Hammerheads" for the 1999 season, for which the league was likewise renamed as the "Indoor Professional Football League" rather than the Professional Indoor Football League.
Season-by-season[edit]
Honolulu Hurricanes 1998 schedule[edit]
