Hurricane (pipe)
Hurricane is the name of a high-end bong marketed as a water pipe for tobacco use. It is manufactured in Germany by Paul Stollwerk, and is widely known for its expensive and unique design.[1]


Design[edit]
The Hurricane's design is different from other pipes in that its corpus is specifically designed to make the smoke swirl, similar to a hurricane. Fine punctures are made along its corpus, creating air-jets which filter out tar particles. Because the smoke rises in a cyclone-like fashion, the centrifugal force pushes the tar particles against the inner wall, where they will be collected through the air-jets.[citation needed] It is advertised as a double-filtered pipe because of this extra form of tar extraction. Different versions of Hurricanes vary in size, as well as in the number of air-jets they have. Having more air jets increases the velocity flow of the smoke when inhaling, which results in a quicker, faster "hit".[2]
In addition, the Hurricane uses a special down-stem, which connects to a small glass bubble filled with water. A bowl is then connected to the top of the bubble. When smoking, the ash falls into the bubble and is kept there, preventing any solid materials from entering the main chamber of the Hurricane. This feature keeps the main water clean, and many users report a smoother taste because of this. The smoke however, does not filter through the water in the bubble.
Every Hurricane has a small hole on the lower front wall of its body, known as a carburetor or "carb". This feature forces the smoke to rise quickly during a "clear", as the external air which is being pulled in does not have to pass the main water tank, which slows it down. Instead the air is rushed into the lungs without any sort of resistance. The down-stem also detaches much like a self-carb pipe such as a Roor so that the ash-catch can be cleared by removing the down-stem, and the corpus can be further cleared by removing the finger from the carb. One apparent downside to the "carb", however is that water tends to spill when the Hurricane is mishandled, or tilted forward too much.
The glass that makes up the Hurricane is advertised as virtually unbreakable, though if it does fracture, the company repairs it at no cost. Every Hurricane is hand-manufactured, and the three legs are forged in fire before being attached to the main body. Every Hurricane can look different based on the height and thickness of its legs, which vary slightly amongst every Hurricane.
Every connection on the Hurricane is "glass on glass", meaning there are no rubber pieces used in any of the connections. The female connection on the pipe itself and the bubble measure 14.5mm, which is the standard for small to medium sized water-pipes.
Sizes[edit]
Hurricanes come in five sizes and in a variety of colors/designs. The unique and distinguishable shape, however, never changes. Hurricanes vary among 250 cc, 600 cc, 750 cc, 1000 cc volumes(cc means cubic centimeters) with the price being accordingly higher for the larger volumes. A sand-blasted, or "frosted" design is available, with some pipes featuring half-frosted, full-frosted, or frosted with A clear window. The number of air jets on the pipe also adds to the price ($50/jet). A tiny, novelty version of the Hurricane is sold as well.
Price[edit]
Hurricanes are known for their extremely high prices. Prices range from $400–$1000, amongst a wide array of sizes and styles. The downstem can range between $30–$50, and the bubble is typically between $80–$100. The expensive price can be attributed to the manufacturing costs, high quality materials, and the fact that the pipes are not domestically produced.
Trademark Features[edit]
Every Hurricane features a crest on the upper-front wall, distinguishing it from fake Hurricanes. "Hurricane" is also inscribed along the lower-back wall. In addition, every Hurricane is hand-etched with a unique number when made, which typically lies underneath one of its three legs.
References[edit]
