Hurricane (pinball)
Hurricane is a pinball machine released by Williams Electronics in August 1991. It was designed by Barry Oursler as the third game in Oursler's amusement park themed pinball trilogy. The first being Comet, released in 1985, and the second being Cyclone, released in 1988.


Description[edit]
The game has some new features and many other features that came from its predecessors. New features include the Hurricane ramp which is a ramp that circles the whole playfield and acts as the skill shot when the player shoots the ball up the ramp on the right side of the playfield awarding the player 500K and adds up and additional 250K each time the skill shot is made successfully. Another new feature is the Juggler in the middle of the playfield that shoots the ball up and then U-turns back down to the Pop bumpers and also acts as the ball lock for multiball. Several other features return from both Comet and Cyclone as well, like the Comet ramp in the middle of the playfield and the Ferris wheel mechanism from Cyclone In which this game has a double Ferris Wheel other than a single one to carry the ball from one ferris wheel to another, then to the ramp and back to the playfield. Other features include the dummy and the shooting gallery targets in form of Cats and Ducks that returned from Comet. Another feature of this game is a rotating backglass that is similar to Cyclone's award wheel with the Hurricane rollercoaster spinning around and choosing the award the player receives on the Dot-Matrix display.
Gameplay Rules[edit]
The primary rules of the game is to complete the PALACE letters, start multiball, and complete the clown face in the middle of the playfield to start Clown Time.
After you have made these six major shots, Clown Time will light at the Hurricane ramp and you must shoot it to start the mode. Clown time will last for 25 seconds and in the mean time, all targets are worth 50K while all of the major shots in the game like both the Comet and the Hurricane Ramp score 500K for the first time, 750K for the second and 1 Million for each major shot for the rest of the mode.
Other Rules[edit]
Digital Versions[edit]
Aside from unauthorized versions that run on Visual Pinball, Hurricane has been released as a licensed table of The Pinball Arcade for several platforms in February 2016.
References[edit]
External links[edit]
