Hurricane (band)
Hurricane is a heavy metal band formed in the 1980s, originally featuring current Foreigner lead vocalist Kelly Hansen (vocals/rhythm guitar), Robert Sarzo (guitar), Tony Cavazo (bass), and Jay Schellen (drums). Cavazo and Sarzo are the younger brothers of Quiet Riot's Carlos Cavazo and Rudy Sarzo.
Hurricane released four albums: Take What You Want (1985), Over the Edge (1988), Slave to the Thrill (1990), and Liquifury (2001). Over the Edge was their most successful album featuring their only top 40 hit (at 33), "I'm on to You" in 1988 (written by Jeff Jones).[2]


History[edit]
Quiet Riot's Kevin DuBrow introduced Robert Sarzo and Tony Cavazo in the early 1980s. After deciding to form a band, Sarzo and Cavazo recruited singer Kelly Hansen, drummer Jay Schellen and guitarist Michael Guy.[3] With little label interest, the band decided to release an album themselves, Take What You Want. The album and constant touring led to them getting a major label deal.
Increasing popularity[edit]
In 1986 & 1987 they opened for Stryper on their To Hell with the Devil album tour. They were soon signed to Enigma Records, the same label as Stryper. They also opened for Gary Moore's 87 US tour.
In 1988, the band released their major label debut album, Over the Edge. Propelled by a powerful, yet melodic hard rock sound, the album dipped into the top 100 (at 92) on the album charts[4] and featured a cover of Alice Cooper's "I'm Eighteen," as well as the band's most successful hit, the Jeff Jones-penned "I'm On to You." The title track, "Over the Edge" was also released as a single.
In 1989, Sarzo left the group and was replaced by ex-Lion guitarist, Doug Aldrich. This lineup recorded the album Slave to the Thrill, which was released in 1990. While Allmusic hailed the record as the band's most "focused" album,[5] its success paled in comparison to its predecessor. Noteworthy, however, is the fact that the album's relative lack of success could also be attributed to changing musical climates (indeed, the topic of which Hurricane album was most classic, Over the Edge or Slave to the Thrill remains heavily debated amongst Hurricane fans[6]). Shortly after the release of this album, Aldrich moved on to House of Lords and the rest of the group quickly disintegrated with the onslaught of grunge.
Aftermath[edit]
In 1991 Schellen wrote, recorded and toured extensively with both Unruly Child and Sircle of Silence while Hansen did a considerable amount of session work. Schellen suggested that Hansen help with the recording of Unruly Child's second release, and shortly after they agreed to resurrect Hurricane. English-born blues guitarist Sean Manning (former bandmate and Kevin Dubrow /Quiet Riot guitarist) (guitar) and Larry Antonino (bass) rounded out the new version of the band, and they released Liquifury. Guitarists Carlos Villalobos and Randall Strom also appear as session musicians on this album, performing on one track apiece. Villalobos also co-wrote the track on which he performs. In the late 1990s Schellen begins a continuing collaboration World Trade, Conspiracy with Chris Squire (Yes) and CIRCA: with friend and band mate Billy Sherwood. Schellen joined the popular progressive pop band Asia in 2005 and continues now in Asia Featuring John Payne.
Hansen joined Foreigner, and Aldrich is currently in the Las Vegas production Raiding The Rock Vault.
Manning went on to form The Exiles with 3 other English expatriates, original Bonham vocalist Paul Rafferty, bassist Paul Stanley, and drummer Terry Muscall. The band split up in the mid 1990s but a collection of demos, in part co-produced by Pat Benatar guitarist Neil Giraldo, surfaced in 1996 as Sean Manning & Paul Raffery - The Exiles (Indivision/SDM), with additional musical contributions by Giraldo, longtime Benatar drummer Myron Grombacher, Greg D'Angelo, and Richard Baker, among others.
In 2010, Robert Sarzo and Tony Cavazo, founding members, reunited and recruited singer Andrew Freeman and drummer Mike Hansen. They announced a tour and a CD in 2011. The band is currently on a hiatus.
In 2013, it was announced that Sarzo would be named the new lead guitarist of Geoff Tate's version of Queensrÿche.
Hurricane was the opening act on the 2014 tour with Tate's Queensrÿche. Sarzo played with both the opening and headlining acts on the entire tour.
Members[edit]
Timeline[edit]
Discography[edit]
Albums
Singles
References[edit]
External links[edit]
