Hurriganes
Hurriganes is a Finnish rock band that was formed in the early 1970s. They were very popular in Finland & Estonia in the 1970s and early 1980s, as well as a popular live act in Sweden during this time. Their classic line-up consisted of Remu Aaltonen, Albert Järvinen, and Cisse Häkkinen. The misspelling of the name ("Hurriganes" with a "g") is intentional. Their style of music is very much of a nostalgic, pre-Beatles, roots rock'n'roll orientation. During their "classic" period, the band's output consisted largely of revved-up cover versions of well-known 1950s rock 'n' roll songs, in addition to their own original material. In this sense, Hurriganes can be viewed as Finland's answer to British pub rock performers of the 1970s like Dave Edmunds and Dr. Feelgood.
The founding members were drummer and vocalist Henry "Remu" Aaltonen, bassist Hugo Christer "Cisse" Häkkinen and guitarist Ilkka "Ile" Kallio. Kallio temporarily quit the band in the spring of 1972, being replaced by guitarist Pekka "Albert" Järvinen who was part of the band's most famous line-up.


Career[edit]
Early years[edit]
Hurriganes was founded in 1971 in North Haaga, Helsinki, where a similar rock band Jig-Saw played. Influenced by the name of the North American band Johnny And The Hurricanes, Remu Aaltonen devised the name for his own band. Hurriganes practiced in a garage in Ohjaajantie.
Rock and Roll All Night Long (1972–73)[edit]
Hurriganes' first album Rock and Roll All Night Long was released in 1973. It included songs such as "Say Mama" and "Keep On Knocking". The album's A-side was recorded in concert Klaukkala, such as the B-side of the first paragraph, but the rest was recorded in the studio. This album became the first gold selling record for the band's record label, Love Records.[citation needed]
Roadrunner (1974)[edit]
Hurriganes' commercial high point was with the release of Roadrunner in 1974. The album that included the band's more traditional song "Get On", which won the International European Pop Jury competition.[citation needed] It also included the songs "Roadrunner," "It Ain't What You Do", "I Will Stay" and "The Phone Rang". Roadrunner was recorded in Stockholm at Marcus Music Studios, and the album was also pressed in Stockholm. Roadrunner can be considered as one of the major Finnish rock albums. Roadrunner is still considered one of Finnish rock music's most important albums, and it is Finland's seventh-best-selling album of all time.[citation needed] It was Finland's best-selling album by a Finnish band from 1974 until 1985, when Dingo's Kerjäläisten valtakunta exceeded the volume of sales. The album cover art (by Risto Vuorimies) was the only Finnish album cover in 1977's Hipgnosisin and Roger Dean's work Album Cover Album (Dragons, World Book). The cover's stylish motif was chosen by Hurriganes' bassist Cisse Häkkinen, who owned a light blue 1954 Cadillac Series 62 sedan. The cover shows the Hurriganes' Remu Aaltonen, Cisse Häkkinen and Albert Järvinen posing elegantly in suits sitting on the back seat of the Cadillac. The car ended up in the ownership of Kari Niiranen, or "DJ Nite," a highly popular disc jockey who also toured with Hurriganes. Roadrunner is regarded as one of the best Finnish rock records ever released, and in 2007, it was re-released as a SACD mixed to a 5.1 format.
Crazy Days: Kallio returns (1975)[edit]
Järvinen left the band in the summer of 1975, and Ile Kallio returned to the band after a break of three years. After Roadrunner, the band's popularity was at its highest, and not until the late 1970s did new wave and rockabilly genres succeed in prying Hurriganes from their spot as number one on the Finnish band scene, although in Hurriganes' early career Hullujussi also momentarily stole some acclaim. In the neighboring country of Sweden, the band was a popular live performer well into the 1980s, and broke the concert venue Folkpark's record in audience numbers several times. The same in 1975, when Hurriganes released the album Crazy Days, which reached diamond disk status quickly, but never did beat the Roadrunner album in terms of sales. Crazy Days contained one major hit, originally released by Jim & The Beatmakers in 1964: "My Only One", which had long been on Hurriganes's concert repertoire, a song sung by Cisse in a bravura performance until the end. The album also covered the Lennon-McCartney composition "Bad to Me".
Hot Wheels (1976)[edit]
After Crazy Days, Hot Wheels's sound was rawer and heavier than its predecessor. This album differs from its predecessors in that it contains only Remu's and Cisse's names marked with their own songs. Ile also took part in the songwriting but Remu deliberately left out the name of the data element. The album was recorded in Lahti by Pekka Nurmi at Microvox studio, which was a cheap, seedy, and not very classy basement studio. In Sweden, Hot Wheels was a real breakthrough and their albums are at least equal in importance to Roadrunner. Familiar songs from the album, such as the title track, "Hot Wheels", was heard in 1976-produced, low-budget film Hot Guys, Hot Wheels. The film does not have any particular plot, and it is monitored by girls and boys who end up on a date Hurriganes concert. On the side the video shows Remu, Cisse and Ile and spending their free time, including playing football. The movie was directed by John Itkonen, and it aptly describes life in the 1970s. Hurriganes members played themselves in the movie.
Tsugu Way and Hanger (1977–78)[edit]
Love Records' own brand new studio recorded Tsugu Way (1977), making harassing technical problems, but the content was familiar with some Hurriganes covers, among other things, borrowed from the Beatles' "Hold Me Tight". The album was released in Sweden, Germany and the Netherlands as the "Use Well Hooks". Gold standard of the album was easily reached, even if the sale of a recession in Finland during the downward direction.
In November 1977 Hurriganes Swedish Sonet label, the band held a small tour in London. The next summer it was agreed 30 gigs in Europe Status Quo warm-up. London, however, failed to conquer, and Quo gigs were canceled when the Remu and Cisse went back to Finland among the tour. The reason was apparently the fact that the band was unknown in England, and arrangements for the reception. For example, they were headlining major gigs, as Remu states, "I fucked up to the whole system so we went away".[citation needed]
At this moment Ile's last Hurriganes album was Hanger, where the drummer Beaver Aittojärvi-Oja performed, and keyboardist Jim Pembroke. Remu's back problems prevented him from playing, and short-lived remains of five people Hurriganes went on tour to the Swedish, but the reception was a little contradictory. The concerts' drummer was Tomi Parkkonen.
Kallio changed again to Järvinen (1979–1981) Failure of the British conquest of the company since 1977 in Ile Kallio, began to lose interest in, the band towards and eventually Albert Järvinen was replaced by the Kallio in early 1979. The last Iles played by a record was Shorai Shorai singles, of which music magazine Soundi commented that it is now running again, when Albert returned to the band. Single-namely was not published until after the departure of the band.
Järvinen's second round of the ranks of the band lasted two albums – Jailbird (1979) and 10/80 (1980), the time, the latter of which was a major critical and commercial success, and included the song "Bourbon Street". Album was recorded in Stockholm, ABBA's Polar studios. Produced by Pave Maijanen, who got along well with Albert. Album track start, and Albert's already Remu Kalevala-band era inherited the "Made in Sweden" and the last song, "Just For You" are unusual for Hurriganes instrumentals.
Louhivuori to guitarist (1981–83)[edit]
Järvinen separated from the band in September 1981, apparently mainly due to drinking problems, and he came to be replaced by the renowned studio musician Janne Louhivuori. He played in two Hurriganes albums – 1981's Fortissimo, and the following year's Rockin 'Hurriganes. Hurriganes concert's popularity at this stage was still hard.
Kallio's third round (1983–84)[edit]
Louhivuori left the band in the summer of 1983, and he came to the place of the Ile Kallio, who played the band's last underserved studio talents Seven Days, Seven Nights (1983), and Hurrygames (1984), which was made to a long video.
Albert, the third and Louhivuori second round (1988)[edit]
The band spent four years trying to come back in 1988, this time with guitarist Albert Järvinen, but failed to get the first Finnish band, although a number of summer concerts of the Hurriganes were very popular. The last concert was recorded live album Live at Metropol, with guitarist Janne Louhivuori. The band broke up soon after the live album, the required material was obtained from the heap.
Musicians' memories[edit]
Bassist Cisse Häkkinen, died in 1990 in Espoo, Jorvi, of alcohol related illnesses. The guitarist, Albert Järvinen, died the following year in March in London. Häkkinen and Järvinen death Remu Aaltonen stuff Hurriganes brands including Remu Plays Hurriganes tour, which was playing a leading Finnish musicians.[vague]
Live In Stockholm 1977[edit]
In 1996, the Hurriganes appeared at Live In Stockholm 1977. The album has been stored on the C-cassette, concert sound clip, the guitarist Ile Kallio found among their goods in connection with removal the tape having been missing for years. The album sold gold in Finland & Estonia quickly, and was recorded in Sweden's breakthrough concert Jarla Theatre in 1977. That same evening, two consecutive concerts: the first was sold out immediately, it was decided to organize the same way the other.
New Hurriganes since 1998[edit]
Remu Aaltonen re-introduced the Hurriganes name in 1998, when the band consisted of two new players. Older members (Ile Kallio, Janne Louhivuori) weren't part of the new line up. New players were Harry Merilahti, bass and vocals, and guitar, his son, Rocka Merilahti. Configuration published in 2001 a 30th Anniversary album, which included the old hits of the 2000s (decade) versions. The configuration was changed in 2004 when the band joined guitarist Jukka Orma and bassist Mikko Löytty. In 2006, guitarist Jukka Orma changed to Nipa Niilola. In 2009, Juho Pitkänen joined to Hurriganes as guitarist. In 2011, bassist turned Hike Kärppä (Daltons-band) and Pitkänen long stayed away from the composition.
Hurriganes is a kind of autobiographical film made in 2007, Ganes, who came to the premiere of 28 September 2007. The movie was directed by JP Siili. Remu Aaltonen, was closely involved in film making. He has also announced that a new Hurriganes album recording sessions would begin in late 2007.
Music and stage presence[edit]
Hurriganes gained fame from the beginning of a wild and energetic stage presence, of a kind not previously experienced in Finland. The band's music was straightforward rock and roll. The band's repertoire included a number of versions of originality in 1950 – and the 1960s rock classics, including Little Richard's "Slippin' and Slidin'" and Bo Diddley's "Roadrunner". Stage presence, dress like a playing, everything came full force and enthusiasm. Remu Aaltonen, who replied Cisse Häkkinen style, and made him a 1950s rocker style, sitting in full. Hurriganes members of the popular clothing included: Beavers-brand jeans and denim jackets, leather jackets and boots.
Hurriganes impact on Finnish rock music[edit]
Hurriganes is considered to be the first Finnish rock band who also gained commercial success overseas. Many of the later Finnish rock bands acknowledge Hurriganes as Finland's great pioneer in the genre. These include, for example, Hanoi Rocks. Hanoi Rocks guitarist Andy McCoy has said that the 1970s and 1980s had only two real Finnish rock bands: Hurriganes and Hanoi Rocks.
Members[edit]
Former members[edit]
Albums[edit]
See also[edit]
External links[edit]
