University of Washington
The University of Washington (commonly referred to as UW, simply Washington, or informally "U-Dub")[5] is a large, public flagship research university in Seattle, Washington, established in 1861.
Washington is one of the oldest universities on the West Coast. It has three campuses, with the oldest and largest being located in the University District of Seattle and two others in Tacoma and Bothell. The university is among the most reputable and most competitive within the United States. Overall, Washington encompasses 500 buildings and over 20 million gross square footage of space, including over 26 university libraries, the UW Tower office building, art centers, museums, lecture halls, laboratories and conference centers.
Washington is a member of the Association of American Universities and is consistently ranked among the top 15 universities in the world by a variety of international publications. The University offers bachelor's, master's and doctoral degrees through its 140 departments, organized into various colleges and schools. Its alumni, faculty and students include numerous Nobel Prize laureates, Pulitzer Prize winners, Fulbright Scholars, Rhodes Scholars, Marshall Scholars, as well as members of distinguished institutions. Washington is home to the best medical school in the U.S.,[6] as well as some of the nation's top schools in business, computer science, engineering, law, pharmacy and statistics. In athletics, the university competes in the NCAA Division I Pac-12 Conference (Pac-12). Its athletic teams are called the Huskies.


History[edit]
Founding[edit]
In 1854, territorial governor Isaac Stevens recommended the establishment of a university in Washington. Prominent Seattle-area residents, including Methodist preacher Daniel Bagley, saw this as a chance to add to the city's potential and prestige. They convinced early founder of Seattle (and member of the territorial legislature), Arthur A. Denny, on the importance of the school. Two universities were initially chartered, but later the decision was repealed in favor of a single university in Lewis County provided that locally donated land was available. When no site emerged, Denny successfully petitioned the legislature to reconsider Seattle as a location in 1858.
In 1861, scouting began for an appropriate 10 acres (4 ha) site in Seattle to serve as a new university campus. Arthur and Mary Denny donated eight acres, while fellow pioneers Edward Lander, and Charlie and Mary Terry, donated two acres on Denny's Knoll in downtown Seattle.[7] More specifically, this tract was bounded by 4th Avenue to the west, 6th Avenue to the east, Union Street to the north, and Seneca Streets to the south.
On November 4, 1861, Washington opened as the Territorial University of Washington. The legislature passed articles incorporating the university, and establishing its Board of Regents in 1862. The school initially struggled, closing three times: in 1863 for low enrollment and again in 1867 and 1876 due to funds shortage. Washington successfully awarded its first graduate Clara Antoinette McCarty Wilt in 1876, with a bachelor's degree in science.
19th century relocation[edit]
By the time Washington State entered the Union in 1889, both Seattle and the University had grown substantially. Washington's total undergraduate enrollment increased from 30 to nearly 300 students, and the campus's relative isolation in downtown Seattle faced encroaching development. A special legislative committee, headed by UW graduate Edmond Meany, was created to find a new campus to better serve the growing student population and faculty. The committee eventually selected a site on the northeast of downtown Seattle, called Union Bay, and the legislature appropriated funds for its purchase and construction.
In 1895, the university relocated to the new campus by moving into the newly built Denny Hall. The University Regents tried and failed to sell the old campus, eventually settling with leasing the area. This would later become one of the University's most valuable pieces of real estate in modern-day Seattle, generating millions in annual revenue with what is now called the Metropolitan Tract. The original Territorial University building was torn down in 1908, and its former site now houses the Fairmont Olympic Hotel.
The sole-surviving remnants of Washington's first building are four 24-foot (7.3 m), white, hand-fluted cedar, Ionic columns. They were salvaged by Edmond S. Meany, one of the University's first graduates and former head of its history department. Meany and his colleague, Dean Herbert T. Condon, dubbed the columns as "Loyalty," "Industry," "Faith", and "Efficiency", or "LIFE." The columns now stand in the Sylvan Grove Theater.[8]
20th century expansion[edit]
Organizers of the 1909 Alaska-Yukon-Pacific Exposition eyed the still largely undeveloped campus as a prime setting for their world's fair. They came to an agreement with Washington's Board of Regents that allowed them to use the campus grounds for the exposition. In exchange, Washington would take advantage of the campus and its development after the fair's conclusion. This arrangement led to a detailed site plan and several buildings, prepared in part by John Charles Olmsted. The plan was later incorporated into the overall campus master plan, permanently affecting the campus layout.
Both World Wars brought the military to campus, with certain facilities temporarily loaned to the federal government. Regardless, subsequent post-war periods were times of dramatic growth for the University.[9] The period between the wars saw a significant expansion on the upper campus. Construction of the liberal arts quadrangle, known to students as "The Quad," began in 1916 and continued to 1939. The University's architectural centerpiece, Suzzallo Library, was built in 1926 and expanded in 1935. After World War II, further growth came with the G.I. Bill. Among the most important developments of this period was the opening of the School of Medicine in 1946, now consistently ranked as the top medical school in the United States. It would eventually also led to the University of Washington Medical Center, ranked by U.S. News and World Report to be among the top ten hospitals in the nation.
During this era, many Japanese Americans were sent away to internment camps along the west coast, as part of Executive Order 9066 following the attacks on Pearl Harbor. Many Japanese American students and "soon-to-be" graduates were unable to receive diplomas, or be recognized for accomplishments at the university, until Washington's commemoration ceremony for the Japanese Americans entitled The Long Journey Home, in May 2008.
From 1958-1973, the University of Washington saw tremendous growth in students, faculties, operating budget, and prestige under leadership of Charles Odegaard. UW student enrollment had more than doubled to 34,000 as the baby boom generation came of age. However, this era was also marked by high levels of student activism, as was the case at many American universities. Much of the unrest focused around civil rights and opposition to the Vietnam War.[10][11] In response to anti-Vietnam War protests by the late 1960s, the University Safety and Security Division became the University of Washington Police Department.[12]
Odegaard instituted a vision of building a "community of scholars", convincing the Washington State legislatures to increase their investments towards the university. Washington senators, such as Henry M. Jackson and Warren G. Magnuson, also used their political clout to build research funds for UW. The results included an operating budget increase of $37 million in 1958 to over $400 million in 1973, and solidified UW as a top recipients of federal research funds in the United States even today. Establishment of technology giants such as Microsoft, Boeing and Amazon near UW has also proved to be highly influential, not only improving graduate prospects,[13][14] but also helping to attract millions of dollars in university and research funding through its extensive list of distinguished faculty and alumni network.[15]
21st century[edit]
In 1990, the University of Washington opened additional campuses in Bothell and Tacoma. Although originally intended for students who have already completed two years of higher education, both schools have transitioned into four-year, degree-granting universities. The first freshman class for these campuses came in the fall of 2006, and both campuses now offer a selection master's degree programs as well. In 2012, the University began exploring plans and governmental approval to expand the main Seattle campus, which includes significant increases in student housing, teaching facilities for the growing student body and faculty, as well as expanded public transit options.
The UW station, completed in March 2015 with six months ahead of schedule and $150 million under budget,[16] connects Seattle's Capitol Hill to the UW Husky Stadium within 5 minutes of rail travel time.[17] It represents a previously unavailable option of transportation into and out of the campus, designed specifically to reduce dependence on private vehicles, bicycles and local King County buses.
Campus[edit]
The University of Washington main campus in Seattle is situated on the shores of Union and Portage Bays, with views of the Cascade Range to the east, and the Olympic Mountains to the west. It is bounded by 15th Avenue N.E. on the west, by N.E. 45th Street on the north, by Montlake Boulevard N.E. on the east, and by N.E. Pacific Street on the south.
The campus is consistently one of the most highly regarded within the nation. Major motion pictures have either been filmed on campus or used it as a backdrop, including 21 and Over,[18] The Sixth Man,[19] WarGames,[20] and What the Bleep!?: Down the Rabbit Hole.[21]
Organization and administration[edit]
Governance[edit]
University of Washington's Interim President Ana Mari Cauce was selected president by the Board of Regents, effective October 13, 2015.[22] The previous President of the University of Washington was Michael K. Young. Phyllis Wise, who had previously served as Provost and Executive Vice President and for a year as Interim President, was named the Chancellor of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in August 2011.[23] On February 3, 2015, it was announced that Young will be the next President of Texas A&M University.[24]
The University is governed by ten Regents, one of whom is a student. Its most notable former regent is likely William H. Gates, Sr., the father of Bill Gates. The undergraduate student government is the Associated Students of the University of Washington (ASUW) and the graduate student government is the Graduate and Professional Student Senate (GPSS).
Sustainability[edit]
Environmental sustainability has long been a major focus of the university's Board of Regents and Presidents. In February 2006, the UW joined a partnership with Seattle City Light as part of their Green Up Program, ensuring that all of Seattle campus' electricity is supplied by and purchased from renewable sources.[25] In 2010, then UW President Emmert furthered the university's efforts with a host of other universities across the U.S., and signed the American College & University Presidents' Climate Commitment.[26] UW created a Climate Action Team,[27] as well as an Environmental Stewardship Advisory Committee (ESAC) which keeps track of UW's greenhouse gas emissions and carbon footprint.[28] Policies were enacted with environmental stewardship in mind, and institutional support was provided to assist with campus sustainability.[29]
Additionally, UW's Student Housing and Food Services (HFS) office has dedicated several million dollars annually towards locally produced, organic, and natural foods. HFS also seized the use of styrofoam containers on-campus, and instead opted for compostable cups, plates, utensils, and packaging whenever possible. New residence halls planned for 2020 are also expected to meet silver or gold LEED standards.[30] Overall, the University of Washington was one of several universities to receive the highest grade, "A-", on the Sustainable Endowments Institute's College Sustainability Report Card in 2011.[31] The University was one of 15 Overall College Sustainability Leaders, among the 300 institutions surveyed.[32]
Academics and research[edit]
The University offers bachelor's, master's and doctoral degrees through its 140 departments, themselves organized into various colleges and schools:[33]
The University of Washington recruits faculty and staff from around the world.[34] Among the faculty, there are 151 members of American Association for the Advancement of Science, 68 members of the National Academy of Sciences, 67 members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 53 members of the Institute of Medicine, 7 Nobel Prize laureates, 2 Pulitzer Prize winners, 1 winner of the Fields Medal, 21 members of the National Academy of Engineering, 1 member of the National Academy of Public Administration, 29 winners of the Presidential Early Career Awards in Science and Engineering, 15 Howard Hughes Medical Institute Investigators, 15 MacArthur Fellows, 9 winners of the Gairdner Foundation International Award, 5 winners of the National Medal of Science, 5 winners of Albert Lasker Award for Clinical Medical Research, 4 members of the American Philosophical Society, 2 winners of the National Book Award, and 2 winners of the National Medal of Arts.[35][36] By 2012, UW students include 136 Fulbright Scholars, 35 Rhodes Scholars, 7 Marshall Scholars and 4 Gates Cambridge Scholars.[37]
Admissions[edit]
Since 1977, the University of Washington has operated a Transition School and Early Entrance Program on campus.[38] The university's undergraduate admissions process is rated at 91/99 by the Princeton Review meaning highly selective,[39][40] and is classified as "more selective" by the U.S. News & World Report.[41] For students entering Fall 2016, 19,733 were accepted out of 43,517 applications - a 45.3% acceptance rate. 6,475 of the admitted students enrolled.[42]
Among freshman students who enrolled in fall 2016, SAT scores for admitted students ranged from 1210-1420. More specifically, the middle 50% scores ranged from 610-700 for evidence-based reading and writing, and 600–740 for math.[42] ACT composite scores for the middle 50% ranged from 26–32.[42] The middle 50% of high school GPA ranged from 3.68–3.94, out of typically 4.0.[42]
Rankings and reputation[edit]
Washington is a globally recognized flagship university, as reflected in its strong performance across rankings. It was listed as a "Public Ivy" in Greene's Guides since 2001,[51] and is an elected member of the American Association of Universities.[52]
The Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) has consistently ranked UW as one of the top 20 universities worldwide every year since its first release.[53] In 2017, UW ranked 13th worldwide out of 500 by the ARWU, 25th worldwide out of 981 in the Times Higher Education World University Rankings, and 26th worldwide out of 101 in the Times World Reputation Rankings.[54] Meanwhile, QS World University Rankings ranked it 59th worldwide, out of over 900.
U.S. News & World Report's Best Global Universities ranked UW as top 10th worldwide, out of 1,000 in 2018 list. Nationally, UW's undergraduate program was tied for 54th out of 310, and among public universities was tied for 16th out of 133. As for graduate programs, UW was ranked as follows in 2017:
Other nationally competitive UW graduate programs include statistics at 7th, pharmacy and education at 9th, engineering at 25th, business at 27th, and law at 30th — also referred to as a competitive "Tier 1" school.[6]
As for other rankings: In 2010, Top American Research Universities, published by The Center for Measuring University Performance of Arizona State University, ranked the University of Washington 11th among the top 50 American universities.[55] In 2011, UW was ranked 8th globally among 2,000 universities in University Ranking by Academic Performance (URAP) published by Middle East Technical University.[56] Top 200 Colleges and Universities in the World, published by 4 international colleges and universities, ranked UW at 8th globally in 2012.[57] In 2017, the Leiden Ranking, which focuses on science and the impact of scientific publications among the world's 500 major universities, ranked UW 12th globally and 5th in the US.[58][59]
Washington is also recognized in more specific domains. In 2012, the Wall Street Journal's SmartMoney named UW 6th best in salary returns on tuition.[60] In 2014, Kiplinger magazine's "Best Values in Public Colleges" named UW 11th for in-state students, and 28th for out-of-state students.[61] In 2012, the U.S. Peace Corps ranked UW 2nd among large U.S. universities, based on the number of undergraduate alumni serving as volunteers.[62] In the Washington Monthly National University Rankings, UW was ranked 8th domestically in 2017.[63]
Research[edit]
The University of Washington research budget passed its $1.0 billion milestone in 2012,[64] and endowments reached almost $3.0 billion by 2016.[65] As a large flagship university, UW's research budget consistently ranks among the top 5 in both public and private universities in the United States.[66][67] UW is also the largest recipient of federal research funding among public universities, and 2nd among all public and private universities in the country: a position held since 1974.[68]
To promote equal academic opportunity, especially for people of low income, UW launched Husky Promise in 2006. Families of income up to 65 percent of state median income or 235 percent of federal poverty level are eligible. With this, up to 30 percent of undergraduate students may be eligible. The cut-off income level that UW set is the highest in the nation, making top quality education available to more people. Then UW President, Mark Emmert, simply said that being "elitist is not in our DNA".[69][70] "Last year, the University of Washington moved to a more comprehensive approach [to admissions], in which the admissions staff reads the entire application and looks at grades within the context of the individual high school, rather than relying on computerized cutoffs."[71]
UW was the host university of ResearchChannel program (now defunct), the only TV channel in the United States dedicated solely for the dissemination of research from academic institutions and research organizations.[72] Participation of ResearchChannel included 36 universities, 15 research organizations, two corporate research centers and many other affiliates.[73]
In 2014, teams from the University of Washington School of Oceanography and the UW Applied Physics Laboratory successfully completed construction of the first high-power underwater cabled observatory in the United States.
Student life[edit]
As of the 2016–17 autumn quarter, the university had 46,081 total enrollments, making it the largest university (in terms of student population) on the west coast.[76] About 33% of all undergraduates are members of minority groups.[77][78]
Organizations[edit]
Registered groups[edit]
The University of Washington boasts over 800 active Registered Student Organizations (RSOs), one of the largest networks of any universities in the world. RSOs are dedicated to a wide variety of interests both in and beyond campus. Some of these interest areas include academic focus groups, cultural exchanges, environmental activities, Greek life, political/social action, religious discussions, sports, international student gatherings by country, and STEM-specific events. Prominent examples are:
Student government[edit]
The Associated Students of the University of Washington (ASUW) is one of two Student Governments at the University of Washington, the other being the Graduate and Professional Student Senate. It is funded and supported by student fees, and provides services that directly and indirectly benefit them. The ASUW employs over 72 current University of Washington students, has over 500 volunteers, and spends $1.03 million annually to provide services and activities to the student body of 43,000 on campus.[82] The Student Senate was established in 1994 as a division of the Associated Students of the University of Washington. Student Senate is one of two official student governed bodies and provides a broad-based discussion of issues. Currently, the ASUW Student Senate has a legislative body of over 150 senators representing a diverse set of interests on and off campus.[83]
The ASUW was incorporated in the State of Washington on April 20, 1906.[84] On April 30, 1932 the ASUW assisted in the incorporation of the University Bookstore[85] which has been in continuous operation at the same location on University Way for over 70 years. The ASUW Experimental College, part of the ASUW, was created in 1968 by several University of Washington students seeking to provide the campus and surrounding community with a selection of classes not offered on the university curriculum.[86]
Publication[edit]
The student newspaper is The Daily of the University of Washington, usually referred to as The Daily. It is an award-winning publication, and is the second largest daily in Seattle. The Daily is published every day classes are in session during fall, winter and spring quarters, as well as weekly during summer quarters. In 2010, The Daily launched a half-hour weekly television magazine show, "The Daily's Double Shot," on UWTV Channel 27.
Today, UW continues to disseminate knowledge through its proprietary UWTV channel, online and printed publications.[87] Specific faculties also produce their own publications for students and alumni.
Support[edit]
UW offers many services for its students and alumni, beyond the standard offered by most colleges and universities. Its "Student Life" division houses 16 departments and offices that serve students directly and indirectly, including those below and overseen by Vice President and Vice Provost.
Housing[edit]
The University operates one of the largest campuses of any higher education institutions in the world. Despite so, growing faculty and student count has strained the regional housing supply as well as transportation facilities. Starting in 2012, UW began taking active measures to explore, plan and enact a series of campus policies to manage the annual growth. In addition to new buildings, parking and light rail stations, new building construction and renovations have been scheduled to take place through 2020.[89] The plan includes the construction of three six-story residence halls and two apartment complexes in the west section of campus, near the existing Terry and Lander Halls, in Phase I, the renovation of six existing residence halls in Phase II, and additional new construction in Phase III. The projects will result in a net gain of approximately 2,400 beds. The Residence Hall Student Association (student government for the halls) is the second largest student organization on campus and helps plan fun events in the halls. For students, faculty, and staff looking to live off-campus, they may also explore Off-Campus Housing Affairs.[90]
The Greek System at UW has also been a prominent part of student culture for more than 115 years. It is made up of two organizational bodies, the Interfraternity Council (IFC) and the Panhellenic Association. The IFC looks over 34 fraternities with 1900+ members and Panhellenic consists of 19 sororities and 1900 members. The school has additional Greek organizations that do not offer housing and are primarily special interest.
Disabilities[edit]
The DO-IT (Disabilities, Opportunities, Internetworking, and Technology) Center is a program run by the university which assists educational institutions to fully integrate all students, including those with disabilities, into Academic life. DO-IT runs many programs, including the DO-IT Scholars Program, and a database of information on the 'universal' design of educational facilities for students of all levels of physical and mental ability.[91] These design programs reduce systemic barriers which could otherwise hinder the performance of some students. DO-IT's universal design philosophies may also be applied to professional organizations and conferences.[92]
Athletics[edit]
The sports teams participate in the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I-A and in the Pac-12 Conference. Among its facilities on campus are Husky Stadium (football, track and field), the Alaska Airlines Arena at Hec Edmundson Pavilion (basketball, volleyball, and gymnastics), Husky Ballpark (baseball), Husky Softball Stadium, The Bill Quillian Tennis Stadium, The Nordstrom Tennis Center, Dempsey Indoor (Indoor track and field, football) and the Conibear Shellhouse (rowing). The golf team plays at the Washington National Golf Club and until recently, the swimming team called the Weyerhaeuser Aquatic Center and the Husky pool home. (The university eliminated its men's and women's swim teams in May 2009.)[93] The football team is traditionally competitive, having won the 1960 and 1991 national title, to go along with eight Rose Bowl victories and an Orange Bowl title. From 1907 to 1917, Washington football teams were unbeaten in 64 consecutive games, an NCAA record.[94] Tailgating by boat has been a Husky Stadium tradition since 1920 when the stadium was first built on the shores of Lake Washington. The Apple Cup game is an annual game against cross-state rival Washington State University that was first contested in 1900 with UW leading the all-time series, 65 wins to 31 losses and 6 ties. College Football Hall of Fame member Don James is a former head coach.
The men's basketball team has been moderately successful, though recently the team has enjoyed a resurgence under coach Lorenzo Romar. With Romar as head coach, the team has been to six NCAA tournaments (2003–2004, 2004–2005, 2005–2006, 2008–2009, 2009–2010 and 2010–2011 seasons), 2 consecutive top 16 (sweet sixteen) appearances, and secured a No. 1 seed in 2005. On December 23, 2005, the men's basketball team won their 800th victory in Hec Edmundson Pavilion, the most wins for any NCAA team in its current arena.
Rowing is a longstanding tradition at the University of Washington dating back to 1901. The Washington men's crew gained international prominence by winning the gold medal at the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin, defeating the German and Italian crews much to the dismay of Adolf Hitler who was in attendance.[95] In 1958, the men's crew deepened their legend with a shocking win over Leningrad Trud's world champion rowers at the Moscow Cup, resulting in the first American sporting victory on Soviet soil,[96][97] and certainly the first time a Russian crowd gave any American team a standing ovation during the Cold War.[98] The men's crew have won 46 national titles[99] (15 Intercollegiate Rowing Association, 1 National Collegiate Rowing Championship), 15 Olympic gold medals, two silver and five bronze. The women have 10 national titles and two Olympic gold medals. In 1997, the women's team won the NCAA championship.[99] The Husky men are the 2015 national champions.
Recent national champions include the softball team (2009), the men's rowing team (2015, 2014, 2013, 2012, 2011, 2009, 2007), NCAA Division I women's cross country team (2008), and the women's volleyball team (2005). Individually, Scott Roth was the 2011 NCAA men's Outdoor Pole Vault and 2011 & 2010 NCAA men's Indoor Pole Vault champion. James Lepp was the 2005 NCAA men's golf champion. Ryan Brown (men's 800 meters) and Amy Lia (women's 1500 meters) won individual titles at the 2006 NCAA Track and Field Championships. Brad Walker was the 2005 NCAA men's Outdoor and Indoor Pole Vault champion.
Husky Stadium is one of several places that may have been the birthplace of the crowd phenomenon known as "The Wave". It is claimed that the wave was invented in October 1981 by Husky graduate Robb Weller and UW band director Bill Bissel. Their opponent that afternoon was Stanford.
On May 1, 2009, the athletic department announced it was discontinuing both men's and women's swimming programs effective immediately due to budget cuts.[100]
Husky Stadium[edit]
The renovated Husky Stadium is the first and primary income source of a completely remodeled athletic district. This major remodel of the athletic village will take decades to complete, as it will take place at the same time as a massive project by the Washington State Department of Transportation on nearby highways and bridges. The stadium project consists of a new grand concourse, underground light-rail station (opened March 19, 2016[101]), enclosed west end of the stadium, replacement of bleachers with individual seating, removal of track and Huskytron, new press box, private box seating, lowering of the field, football offices, permanent seating in the east end zone that does not block the view of Lake Washington, and new and improved amenities, concession stands and bathrooms throughout. The cost for renovating the stadium was around $280 million with a seating capacity slightly lower than previous, at 70,138 seats. Husky Stadium is used for Graduation.
Mascot[edit]
UW students, sports teams, and alumni are called Washington Huskies, and often referred to metonymically as "Montlake," due to the campus's location on Montlake Boulevard N.E.[102] (although the traditional bounds of the Montlake neighborhood do not extend north of the Montlake Cut to include the campus.) The husky was selected as the school mascot by student committee in 1922. It replaced the "Sun Dodger," an abstract reference to the local weather that was quickly dropped in favor of something more tangible. The costumed "Harry the Husky" performs at sporting and special events, and a live Alaskan Malamute, currently named Dubs, has traditionally led the UW football team onto the field at the start of games. The school colors of purple and gold were adopted in 1892 by student vote. The choice was inspired by the first stanza of Lord Byron's The Destruction of Sennacherib:[103][104]
The University of Washington's costumed mascot is Harry the Husky.
The University of Washington has also hosted a long line of Alaskan Malamutes as mascots. The 13 dogs thus far have been:
Originally the dogs were cared for by the Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity, followed by a 49-year tradition (1959–2008) of care by the Cross family (a UW professor followed by his son).
Song[edit]
The University of Washington Husky Marching Band performs at many Husky sporting events including all football games. The band was founded in 1929, and today it is a cornerstone of Husky spirit. The band marches using a traditional high step, and it is one of only a few marching bands left in the United States to do so. Like many college bands, the Husky band has several traditional songs that it has played for decades, including the official fight songs "Bow Down to Washington" and "Tequila", as well as fan-favorite "Africano".
Notable alumni and faculty[edit]
Notable alumni of the University of Washington include U.S. Olympic rower Joe Rantz (1936); architect Minoru Yamasaki (1934); US Senator Henry M. Jackson (JD 1935); Baskin & Robbins co-founder Irv Robbins (1939); former actor, The Hollywood Reporter columnist and TCM host Robert Osborne (1954); glass artist Dale Chihuly (BA 1965); Serial killer Ted Bundy (BA, Psychology 1972); Pulitzer Prize-winning author Marilynne Robinson (PhD 1977), martial artist Bruce Lee; saxophonist Kenny G (1978); MySpace co-founder Chris DeWolfe (1988); actor Tom Choi (BA, Drama); and actor and comedian Joel McHale (1995, MFA 2000).
In film[edit]
See also[edit]
References[edit]
External links[edit]
