Tropical Storm Franklin (2005)
Tropical Storm Franklin was a strong tropical storm over the western Atlantic Ocean during July of the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season. It was the sixth named storm of the season and twice approached hurricane strength. The storm formed over the Bahamas on July 21 then moved north erratically, approaching Bermuda on July 26. Franklin eventually became extratropical near Newfoundland on July 30, before being absorbed by a larger system. The National Hurricane Center struggled to predict Tropical Storm Franklin mainly due to difficulties in predicting the effects of wind shear. There were only minor effects on land from Tropical Storm Franklin and no damages were caused. The name Franklin was used for the first time because of Hurricane Floyd which was retired in the 1999 season.


Meteorological history[edit]
A tropical wave emerged from the African coast late on July 10. The wave entered the Bahamas on July 21 and organized into Tropical Depression Six while 70 miles (110 km) east of Eleuthera.[1] Initially the storm was predicted to execute a clockwise loop and drift to the west in response to a high pressure system. Several models indicated the possibility of the storm to drift westward into central Florida.[2] Soon after the depression formed, it strengthened into Tropical Storm Franklin.
Tropical Storm Franklin suffered high levels of wind shear associated with the development of Tropical Storm Gert, which led the forecasters at the National Hurricane Center to say that Franklin could be torn apart in the next few days.[3] However the shear abated as Franklin moved to the northeast allowing the storm to strengthen. The forecasters then stated that Franklin could "attain and maintain hurricane strength" and make a close approach to Bermuda.[4] Shortly after on July 23, Tropical Storm Franklin reached its peak strength with 70 mph (110 km/h) winds.[1]
Franklin moved erratically to the east weakening as shear increased again. The NHC predicted that would dissipate, but the weakening trend stopped on July 25 with Franklin a minimal tropical storm.[5] The storm passed to 200 miles (325 km) to the west of Bermuda on July 26 and moved slowly northwards into the warmer waters of the Gulf Stream. The shear also reduced once again allowing Franklin to re-strengthen somewhat, with winds reaching 60 mph (95 km/h) on July 28. Franklin began to accelerate to the northeast, becoming extratropical on July 30 to the south of Newfoundland. The extratropical storm passed just south of the Avalon Peninsula later that day and was absorbed by a larger system on July 31.[1]
Impact[edit]
As Tropical Storm Franklin was forming, a tropical storm warning was issued for the northwest Bahamas, but it was canceled as Franklin moved north and away from the islands. A tropical storm watch was issued for Bermuda on July 25 but was canceled a day later when Franklin turned away.[1]
Tropical Storm Franklin developed very close to land in the Bahamas and passed near Bermuda, but there were no reports of tropical storm force winds overland, with the strongest gust recorded on Bermuda being 37 mph (60 km/h). After Franklin became extratropical, it brushed southeastern Newfoundland, bringing about 1 inch (25 mm) of rain to the area.[6] There were no damages or fatalities as a result of Tropical Storm Franklin.[1]
See also[edit]
References[edit]
External links[edit]

